---
rip: 7696
title: Precompile for generic DSM (double scalar multiplication)
description: Proposal to add precompiled contract that performs two point multiplication and an addition over any elliptic curve.
author: Renaud Dubois (@rdubois-crypto)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/rip7696-generic-double-scalar-multiplication-dsm-for-all-curves/19798
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-03-22
---

## Abstract

This proposal creates two precompiled contracts that perform two point multiplication and sum then over any elliptic curve  given `p`, `a`,`b` curve parameters,   `Px1`,`Py1` and`Qx2`,`Qy2` coordinates of points  P and Q, `u`,`v` two scalars. Thus it computes the value uP+vQ over any given weierstrass curve. One of the precompiles provide extra data (512 bits) to enable a consequent speed-up to any curve. This extra data consists in the points $P_{128}=2^{128}P$ and $Q_{128}=2^{128}Q$.

## Motivation

Account abstraction (EIP 4337, EIP7560) enables to replace EoA with non native signature algorithms. While RIP7212 focuses only on P256, there are many other elliptic curves of interest, subject to change according to latest advances either in ZK proving systems, hardware integration or cross chains requirements. This precompiles can achieve many goals such as Stealth, WebAuthn, Schnorr signatures and cheap bridges with other L2s. While most authentication scheme relies today on ECDSA, Schnorr versions are more MPC and ZK-friendly (faster and more secure). Today one can  tweak `ecrecover()` opcode to perform scalar multiplication, given an additional hash. Adding a generic multiplication, in conjugaison with Account Abstraction open the gate for many cheap and powerful use cases. This is a non-exhaustive list of use cases:

1. **ed25519 :** Apple secure enclave,  Webauthn, OpenSSL, Farcaster, bridges with Cosmos, Solana ecosystems.

2. **secp256r1 :** Most of previous use cases plus Android Keystore, Passkeys.

3. **bn254-G1 :** Zcash, Tornado Cash, as specified by EIP1962.

4. **Jujub :** Circom proving system compatibility.

5. **Stark curve :** Starknet Ecosystem.

6. **Other curves :** Pasta, Vela, sec256q1 for inner argument constructions.

This proposal aims to reach maximum security and cryptographic agility for the key management.
While a generic MSM (as proposed by EIP2537, but not limited to BLS12381) would be superior, the variable length and complexity of possible tradeoffs seems to reduce the probability of acceptance. MSM is mainly targeting ZK uses, while for classical non-pairing based cryptography, DSM is the core required operation.

## Specification

### Constants

| Name                  | Value  |
|-----------------------|--------|
| FORK_BLOCK            |  TBD   |
| PRECOMPILED_ADDRESS   |  TBD   |
| ECMULMULADD_COST      |  3500  |
| ECMULMULADD_B4_COST   |  2000  |

### New Precompile

#### Elliptic Curve Information

Any elliptic curve can be expressed under a Weierstrass form defined by the equation $y^2 ≡ x^3 + ax + b \mod p.$ The minimal information of domain parameters required for ecmulmuladd is defined with the following equation and domain parameters:

|  Name  | Value                                                 |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|  p     |  modulus of the elliptic prime field                  |
|  a     |  elliptic curve short weierstrass first coefficient   |
|  b     |  elliptic curve short weierstrass second coefficient  |

### Required Checks in Verification

The following requirements **MUST** be checked by the precompiled contract to verify signature components are valid:

- P and Q coordinates verify the curve equation,
- P and Q coordinates are within prime field range (i.e belong to [0..p-1]).

The following elements are NOT checked by the precompile:

- the provided curve is safe regarding classic criteria (twist security, embedded degree, rho security, etc.)
- the provided points belongs to the right subgroup (for non prime order curves)

As such it is heavily recommended to avoid custom curves without an extended knowledge and examination of the previous criterias.

### Precompiled Contracts Specification

#### ecMulmuladd

The `ecMulmuladd` precompiled contract is proposed with the following input and outputs, which are big-endian values:

- **Input data:** 224 bytes of data including:
    - 32 bytes of the modulus `p` modulus of the prime field of the curve
    - 32 bytes of the `a` first coefficient of the curve
    - 32 bytes of the `b` second coefficient of the curve
    - 32 bytes of the `Px` x coordinate of the first point
    - 32 bytes of the `Py` y coordinate of the first point
    - 32 bytes of the `Qx` x coordinate of the first point
    - 32 bytes of the `Qy` y coordinate of the first point
    - 32 bytes of the `u` first scalar to multiply with P
    - 32 bytes of the `v` second scalar to multiply with Q

- **Output data:** 64 bytes of result data and error
    - If the ecmulmuladd process succeeds, it returns the resulting point as 64 bytes of data. The infinity point (neutral for addition law) is represented as the (0,0) couple.
    - In case of failure it returns an empty chain

#### ecMulmuladdB4

The `ecMulmuladd_b4` precompiled contract is proposed with the following input and outputs, which are big-endian values:

- **Input data:** 416 bytes of data including:
    - 32 bytes of the modulus $p$
    - 32 bytes of the `a` component of the signature
    - 32 bytes of the `b` component of the signature
    - 32 bytes of the `Px` x coordinate of the first point P
    - 32 bytes of the `Py` y coordinate of the first point Q
    - 32 bytes of the `P128x` x coordinate of the point $P_{128}=2^{128}P$  
    - 32 bytes of the `P128y` y coordinate of the point  $P_{128}=2^{128}P$  
    - 32 bytes of the `Qx` x coordinate of the second point Q
    - 32 bytes of the `Qy` y coordinate of the second point Q  
    - 32 bytes of the `Q128x` x coordinate of the point $Q_{128}=2^{128}Q$  
    - 32 bytes of the `Q128y` y coordinate of the point  $Q_{128}=2^{128}Q$  
    - 32 bytes of the `u` first scalar to multiply with P
    - 32 bytes of the `v` second scalar to multiply with Q

- **Output data:** 64 bytes of result data and error
    - If the ecmulmuladd process succeeds, it returns the resulting point as 64 bytes of data. The infinity point (neutral for addition law) is represented as the (0,0) couple.
    - In case of failure it returns an empty chain

### Implementation

The node is free to implement the elliptic computations as it see fit (choice of inner elliptic point reprensentation, ladder, etc). For performances reasons, it is recommended to use Montgomery multiplication in combination with the so called Strauss-Shamir's trick (with a 4 dimensional version for ecmulmuladd_b4). Use of windowing and NAF can speed-up implementation further. The use of a 4 dimensional version provides a speed up equivalent to GLV (Gallant-Lambert-Vanstone) optimization. The difference being that additional off chain precomputations are required.

### Precompiled Contract Gas Usage

- The cost of `ecMulmuladd` is `4000` gas. It is related to the increased cost of the extra call data to a specialized implementation, taking the best pure solidity implementation available for generic curves, which is 10% according to our measures.

- The cost of `ecMulmuladdB4` is `2500` gas. It is the ratio between ecMulmuladd implementation gas cost with and without the extra call data.

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found as the precompiled contract will be added to `PRECOMPILED_ADDRESS` at the next available address in the precompiled address set.

## Test Cases

## Reference Implementation

The Implementation of the `ecMulmuladdB4` precompiled contract is provided as a progressive precompile. Current costs is 160K.

## Security Considerations

The changes are not directly affecting the protocol security. The security is related to the level of investigation the target curve has been through.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
