---
rip: 7712
title: Enable RIP-7560 transactions using a two-dimensional nonce
description: An RIP-7560 transaction modification that allows Smart Contract Accounts to define their own transaction sequencing
author: Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Shahaf Nacson (@shahafn)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/rip-7712-multi-dimensional-256-bit-nonce-for-rip-7560-account-abstraction-transactions/20094
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-01
requires: 7560
---

## Abstract

An RIP-7560 transaction modification that replaces the existing nonce-based sequencing mechanism
of Ethereum with an on-chain pre-deployed contract in order to provide Smart Contract Accounts
with the flexibility they need to support some advanced use cases.

## Motivation

The traditional nonce-based system provides guarantees of transaction ordering and replay protection,
but does so at the expanse of configurability.
Accounts are not able to express their intentions like "allow these three transactions to be mined in
whatever order" or "these two sets of transactions must have separate sequential nonces".

However, with Smart Contract Accounts this creates a bottleneck for some use-cases.
For example, Smart Contract Accounts designed to be operated by multiple participants simultaneously,
will require these participants to coordinate their transactions to avoid invalidating each other.

Another example when this can also be a limitation is a case where there are separate execution flows.
A configuration change may require multiple participants to co-sign a transaction but a regular operation does not.
With sequential nonces, all operations will have to be halted until the configuration change is executed.

Having a more agile ordering and replay protection system will significantly improve the user experience with RIP-7560.

Additionally, this change is required for the Native Account Abstraction to achieve feature parity and compatibility
with ERC-4337, as all ERC-4337 Smart Contract Accounts already use the solution described below.

## Specification

### Constants

| Name                     | Value |
|--------------------------|-------|
| AA_BASE_GAS_COST         | 15000 |
| AA_BASE_GAS_COST_RIP7712 | 10000 |
| AA_NONCE_MANAGER         | tbd   |

### Non-sequential nonce support


We propose an introduction of `nonceKey` to provide a second dimension
for the RIP-7560 transaction's `nonce` parameter.

The two-dimensional nonce value of the transaction is represented as `uint192 nonceKey || uint64 nonceSequence` value.
The contract account nonce is then defined as a mapping `address account => uint192 nonceKey => uint64 nonceSequence`.
This approach guarantees unique transaction nonce and hash but removes the requirement of nonces being sequential
numbers.

This two-dimensional nonce mechanism is exposed to the EVM in a `NonceManager` pre-deployed contract
located at the `AA_NONCE_MANAGER` address.

The two-dimensional nonce is [validated and incremented](#nonce-validation-frame) on-chain
as part of a `AA_TX_TYPE` transaction validation before the rest of the validation code.

### Nonce validation

The first validation on a transaction is of its nonce.

If nonceKey is zero (non-existent), the nonce field is compared to the system nonce, and then then the system nonce is incremented. 
The transaction's base cost is AA_BASE_GAS_COST.

If nonceKey is non-zero, then the `NonceManager` is called to [validate and increment](#nonce-validation-frame) the nonce for this key, and the base cost is AA_BASE_GAS_COST_RIP7712, as the nonce manager frame is paid separately. 

In this case, The old system nonce is not checked and not incremented.


### Deployment transaction

During account deployment transaction, the nonceKey MUST be zero.
The old system nonce is not incremented before the transaction: the CREATE/CREATE2 opcode used by the deployer will cause the "nonce bump" to 1


#### Nonce validation frame

Before the first validation frame is applied during the validation phase,
the `NonceManager` is invoked with the following data:

```
sender{20 bytes} nonceKey{24 bytes} nonceSeq{8 bytes}
```

The gas costs of this execution frame are counted towards the total for a transaction, and is deducted from the account's validationGasLimit passed to `validateTransaction`

#### NonceManager Pseudocode

```

if evm.caller == AA_ENTRY_POINT:
    validate_increment()
else:
    get()

def get():
    if len(evm.calldata) != 44:
        evm.revert()

    // address sender, uint192 key
    address = to_uint160_be(evm.calldata[0:20])
    key = to_uint192_be(evm.calldata[20:44])

    nonce = storage.get(keccak(address, key))

    evm.return((key << 64) + nonce)

def validate_increment():

    address = to_uint160_be(evm.calldata[0:20])
    key = to_uint192_be(evm.calldata[20:44])
    nonce = to_uint64_be(evm.calldata[44:52])

    current_nonce = storage.get(keccak(address, key))

    if (nonce != current_nonce):
        evm.revert()

    storage.set(keccak(address, key), current_nonce + 1)

```

#### NonceManager Bytecode and deployment

TODO.

## Rationale

### Creating a pre-deployed contract instead of modifying an account data structure

While there is no technical benefit to either option, allowing EVM code to control the nonce
seems to be a smaller change to the Ethereum protocol and is more aligned with the vision of Account Abstraction.

## Backwards Compatibility

As actual `nonce` value was never observable inside the EVM, there should be no major complications caused by the
migration to a different nonce mechanism.


Applications should not assume that eth_getTransactionCount returns the total transactions for an account

## Security Considerations

Smart Contract Accounts that need to enforce the sequence of transaction execution must apply appropriate restrictions
on the `nonceKey` value.

In order to require the incremental sequential `nonce` behaviour on-chain, the contracts
may choose to `require(nonceKey == 0)`.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
