---
rip: 0
title: An RIP-7560 two-dimensional nonce transaction subtype
description: An RIP-7560 transaction subtype that allows Smart Contract Accounts to define their own transaction sequencing
author: Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Shahaf Nacson (@shahafn)
discussions-to:
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-01
requires: 7560
---

## Abstract

An RIP-7560 transaction subtype that replaces the existing nonce-based sequencing mechanism
of Ethereum with an on-chain pre-deployed contract in order to provide Smart Contract Accounts
with the flexibility they need to support some advanced use cases.

## Motivation

The traditional nonce-based system provides guarantees of transaction ordering and replay protection,
but does so at the expanse of configurability.
Accounts are not able to express their intentions like "allow these three transactions to be mined in
whatever order" or "these two sets of transactions must have separate sequential nonces".

However, with Smart Contract Accounts this creates a bottleneck for some use-cases.
For example, Smart Contract Accounts designed to be operated by multiple participants simultaneously,
will require these participants to coordinate their transactions to avoid invalidating each other.

Another example when this can also be a limitation is a case where there are separate execution flows.
A configuration change may require multiple participants to co-sign a transaction but a regular operation does not.
With sequential nonces, all operations will have to be halted until the configuration change is executed.

Having a more agile ordering and replay protection system will significantly improve the user experience with RIP-7560.

## Specification

```
ABSTRACT_NONCE_SUBTYPE = x
```

### Non-sequential nonce support

We propose an introduction of a separate 2-dimensional `nonce` value used when contracts initiate a transaction.

The `nonce` parameter of the transaction is to be interpreted as `uint192 key || uint64 seq` value.
The contract account nonce is then defined as a mapping `address account => uint192 key => uint64 seq`.
This approach guarantees unique transaction nonce and hash but removes the requirement of nonces being sequential
numbers.

This `nonce` is exposed to the EVM in a `NonceManager` pre-deployed contract located at the `AA_NONCE_MANAGER` address.

The `nonce` is [validated and incremented](#nonce-validation-frame) on-chain before the rest of the validation code.

The old `nonce` account parameter remains in use for transactions initiated by EOAs and for the `CREATE` opcode.
It is not incremented when `sender` makes the `ABSTRACT_NONCE_SUBTYPE` transaction.

#### Nonce validation frame

Before the first validation frame is applied during the validation phase,
the `NonceManager` is invoked with the following data:

```solidity
abi.encodePacked(sender, nonce)
```

The gas costs of this execution frame are counted towards the total for a transaction.

#### NonceManager Pseudocode

```

if evm.caller == AA_ENTRY_POINT:
    validate_increment()
else:
    get()

def get():
    if len(evm.calldata) != 44:
        evm.revert()

    // address sender, uint192 key
    address = to_uint160_be(evm.calldata[0:20])
    key = to_uint192_be(evm.calldata[20:44])

    nonce = storage.get(keccak(address, key))

    evm.return((key << 64) + nonce)

def validate_increment():

    address = to_uint160_be(evm.calldata[0:20])
    key = to_uint192_be(evm.calldata[20:44])
    nonce = to_uint64_be(evm.calldata[44:52])

    current_nonce = storage.get(keccak(address, key))

    if (nonce != current_nonce):
        evm.revert()

    storage.set(kecca
    k(address, key), current_nonce + 1)

```

#### NonceManager Bytecode and deployment

TODO.

## Rationale

### Creating a pre-deployed contract instead of modifying an account data structure

While there is no technical benefit to either option, allowing EVM code to control the nonce
seems to be a smaller change to the Ethereum protocol and is more aligned with the vision of Account Abstraction.

## Backwards Compatibility

As actual `nonce` value was never observable inside the EVM, there should be no major complications caused by the
migration to a different nonce mechanism.

Smart Contract Accounts could access the `uint256 nonce` value in the `TransactionType4` struct and ignore the
higher 192 bits assuming nonce cannot exceed 64 bits.
This assumption is wrong and is broken by `ABSTRACT_NONCE_SUBTYPE` transactions.

## Security Considerations

Smart Contract Accounts that need to enforce the sequence of transaction execution must apply appropriate restrictions
on the `uint192 key` value.

In order to require the pre-`ABSTRACT_NONCE_SUBTYPE` behaviour on-chain, the contracts
may choose to `require(key == 0)`.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
